---
layout: post
title:  "Lava Wall Weapon"
summary: "A weapon that shoots blobs of lava that cool to provide temprary cover"
date:   2025-02-24 10:17:00
preview: /assets/LavaWallThumbNail.png
---

{% include youtube.html id="nTMKSbz90nU" %}

This effect was created for an Introduction to Houdini Course I took Fall of 2024 at Hochschule Darmstadt. The idea was to create a zoning ability that would work in a Hero Shooter style of game, like Mei's ice wall from overwatch.

I started this effect by running a lava simulation in houdini. I found that as the viscosity increased it didn't create as nice of splashes as I would have liked, so I had to fake the shape a bit by creating a large, egg-shaped collider for it to hit. 

{% include youtube.html id="_1f4Es9hC5s" %}

I remeber from high-school geology that slow cooling rocks have a rough texture, while quickly cooling rocks are smooth, and glassy, so I set up one of the color channels to store at what frame it solidifies (normalized to 0-1), and another channel to store the actual temperature at that point of the simulation (again normalized 0-1), these channels were red and green respectively (in the future I could bake more data in the unused blue channel). Then once I had exported to Unreal, I used those channels to mix between a glowing, molten look, and a solid, rocky obsidian look. For the texture mapping, I used the pixels world space position, this provided me with 2 benefits: It meant I did not have to bother with calculating, and then exporting the UV maps, and it would give me some free animation as when the model moves, the texture changes accordingly. This is not the cheapest method for texturing, but worked well for this effect.

<object data="/assets/LavaBall.jpg" width="30%" height="30%"></object>
<object data="/assets/LavaVidSmall.gif" width="30%" height="30%"></object>
<object data="/assets/LavaWallStill.jpg" width="30%" height="30%"></object>

In order to not eat up all of the V-Ram, I exported 3 objects, first is the projectile, then the splash as a Vertex Animation Texture mesh + material to make it work, and finally a static mesh of just the wall/final resting point of the animation. When you shoot the gun, only the projectile is active, until it hits something, then (if that thing is the floor) we instance the VATs mesh/anim, and destroy it once it's finished and replace it with the static mesh. As a little addition, I also rotate it based on it's XY velocity so you can ricochet and have it act like a perpendicular wall if you'd like.
